README.md, before:

# fastdiv

fastdiv is a snippet of C language code that can be used for improving
performance of division or modulo by rarely varying or non-compile-time
invariant integers. For compile-time invariant integers, the C compiler is most
likely already doing similar tricks.

The benefit is that modulo operation is about 1.3 ns instead of 2.3 ns on a
typical computer. Division performace improvement is even better: 1.0 ns vs 2.4
ns.

The drawback is that initializing the context to calculate modulo by a
particular integer takes about 3.2 ns. So, for modulo, 1.3 ns + 3.2 ns = 4.5
ns, slower than 2.3 ns for ordinary modulo.

The same is true for division: 1.0 ns + 3.2 ns = 4.2 ns, slower than 2.4 ns as
required for ordinary division.

The optimization thus makes sense only if multiple numbers are divided by the
same integer.

Applications would be expected to include non-power-of-2-sized hash tables and
fast generation of random numbers from an uniform integer distribution.

Note that currently only uint32\_t by uint32\_t division is supported, and the
divisor must actually fit into int32\_t, so highest bit must be zero.

# References

For the academic paper reference, see:
https://gmplib.org/~tege/divcnst-pldi94.pdf

Or directly from ACM: https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=178249

T. Granlund, and P. L. Montgomery, "Division by invariant integers using
multiplication," ACM SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 61-72, 1994.

Also, a more recent paper could be interesting:
https://gmplib.org/~tege/division-paper.pdf

Or directly from IEEE: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/5487506/

N. Moller, and T. Granlund, "Improved division by invariant integers," IEEE
Transactions on Computers, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 165--175, 2011.

Commit message:

Build system and library structure

README.md, after:

# fastdiv

fastdiv is a snippet of C language code that can be used for improving
performance of division or modulo by rarely varying or non-compile-time
invariant integers. For compile-time invariant integers, the C compiler is most
likely already doing similar tricks.

The benefit is that modulo operation is about 1.3 ns instead of 2.3 ns on a
typical computer. Division performace improvement is even better: 1.0 ns vs 2.4
ns.

The drawback is that initializing the context to calculate modulo by a
particular integer takes about 3.2 ns. So, for modulo, 1.3 ns + 3.2 ns = 4.5
ns, slower than 2.3 ns for ordinary modulo.

The same is true for division: 1.0 ns + 3.2 ns = 4.2 ns, slower than 2.4 ns as
required for ordinary division.

The optimization thus makes sense only if multiple numbers are divided by the
same integer.

Applications would be expected to include non-power-of-2-sized hash tables and
fast generation of random numbers from an uniform integer distribution.

Note that currently only uint32\_t by uint32\_t division is supported, and the
divisor must actually fit into int32\_t, so highest bit must be zero.

# Directory structure

If you want to just look at the simplest possible fast division code, you may
look at the file fastdiv.c in the root directory. However, the code is also
available as a library, built using stirmake
(https://github.com/Aalto5G/stirmake). The lib directory contains the library
and the examples directory contains how to use that library. Integration with
external build systems using stirmake is optimal; integration with external
build systems using make is possible by calling stirmake as a sub-make but then
the benefits of stirmake are lost.

# References

For the academic paper reference, see:
https://gmplib.org/~tege/divcnst-pldi94.pdf

Or directly from ACM: https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=178249

T. Granlund, and P. L. Montgomery, "Division by invariant integers using
multiplication," ACM SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 61-72, 1994.

Also, a more recent paper could be interesting:
https://gmplib.org/~tege/division-paper.pdf

Or directly from IEEE: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/5487506/

N. Moller, and T. Granlund, "Improved division by invariant integers," IEEE
Transactions on Computers, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 165--175, 2011.
